---
layout: post
title: Can WFH be the New Norm? - A Survey Study on the IT Sector in Bangladesh
---

The COVID-19 pandemic has reshaped our way of life in many ways in the past 5 months of lockdown. This includes the professional workforce. Organizations closed down their offices, and workers and managers had to operate remotely. As a result, Work From Home (WFH) quickly became the new mode of operations for the majority of the population.
One of the earliest industries to adopt WFH in Bangladesh was the software development industry or the Information Technology (IT) sector. With resources (mostly) distributable virtually, this sector saw a quick transition to remote operations. Now, after months of functioning in the WFH set-up, a new question arose naturally: "Can WFH be extended after the lockdown is lifted?"
Globally, and before the pandemic even began, WFH had already seen industry-wide examination and adoption. In our country, however, remote work had not been considered in earnest due to fears of resource scarcity and productivity loss. Now that the pandemic has forced us to not only consider but also adopt it regardless, an opportunity has come forth to better understand the effects of WFH and debunk or establish any conjectures made beforehand.
With that goal in mind, the Distributed Systems and Software Engineering (DSSE) Research Group of Institute of Information Technology (IIT), University of Dhaka conducted a survey study. Under the supervision of professor Dr. Kazi Muheymin-Us Sakib, the research group surveyed over 1000 professionals in the IT sector of Bangladesh on their performance and environment in WFH. With 46 attributes examined, the study aims to demonstrate how different aspects of a professional's work has been influenced by WFH and determine whether WFH positively or negatively affected a worker's performance. Furthermore, the study shows the change in productivity and its relation with the different attributes in question.
The results, as detailed in the charts below, show that the effects of WFH are not homogenous, with both positive and negative consequences to remote work. However, it does demonstrate its viability in the long run, provided that necessary steps are undertaken to negate the unwanted outcomes.
